Hello, I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington, and this is Primetime Radio.
In this edition of our program, we talk with two people who have spent major portions of their careers counseling adults.
Both of them recognize there are particular problems of older Americans that need counseling, and that the need for such counseling is acute.
The problem is that it doesn't seem very glamorous to a lot of counselors, and as in so many other areas of life, the particular problems of older Americans are often assumed to be caused by problems unique to age.
We find out why that isn't necessarily the case.
We also meet a man who's recently written a book about bibliomains, people to whom the book has become more than something to read, has become their whole life.
We talk about Cleopatra, Thomas Jefferson, and Stephen Blumberg, who was such a bibliomain that he stole hundreds of thousands of books from university libraries.
Stay tuned as primetime radio comes your way.
Hello, I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington, and welcome to Primetime Radio.
You can't teach an old dog new tricks.
You know she's aging and she's set in her ways.
He's lived so long he thinks he knows it all.
You can't tell him anything.
We spend a lot of time rationalizing and thus avoiding talking with what one of our guests in Primetime Radio today calls third-age people, so much so that government agencies who welcome the young, the poor, the disadvantaged, and the displaced sometimes spend little attention toward older Americans, particularly in the area of counseling.
As we discuss counseling of third-age Americans in this program, we'll discover several interesting things.
Far from being inflexible and set in their ways, a higher percentage of older Americans report success from counseling than from the general population.
Rather than being an entirely separate group because of their age, older Americans often share the same symptoms and reactions to therapy as younger patients.
It does remain true, however, that third-age problems are often unique.
While problems of the ex-generation may be more often associated with lifestyle decisions, the third age decisions and problems revolve around a peaceful enjoyment of the last third of their lives.
Their decisions about lifestyle are more limited by external factors, the choices for the future more constricted.
With two outstanding counselors, we're going to investigate
counseling for older Americans in this edition of Primetime Radio.
And we welcome to our studios here in Washington, Nancy Schlossberg, who is a professor at the University of Maryland in the Department of Counseling and Personnel Services.
She's a specialist in adult transitions and author of several books on the subject.
And on her phone, out to Decatur, Illinois, James Warnick, who's the chief counselor at the Decatur, Illinois Mental Health Center and author of Listening with Different Ears, Counseling People Over 60.
Jim, Nancy, welcome to Primetime Radio.
Good to be here.
Glad to be here.
How different, or let's put it this way, how crucial is age as a determinant in approaching counseling in general?
Nancy?
Well, in my view, it is not the critical variable at all.
In fact, Jim, I'm very eager to talk with you about the title of your book, which is, I believe, Listening with Different Ears Counseling People Over 60.
And the reason I'm interested is because I'm not sure I could differentiate between a 50-year-old person with a chronic illness that's debilitating and a 70-year-old.
Nor could I differentiate between an 80-year-old who just got married and had a great big ball last Friday night to which I went.
and say a 40-year-old who's miserable because she has no relationship.
So I'm not sure that age is the variable in terms of counseling.
Rather, I look at what's going on in the person's life in terms of health, optimism, joie de vivre, and you've got a lot of 80-year-olds and 70-year-olds who've got a lot of that and are still working and not filled with losses.
So I'm concerned about using age.
What do you say, Jim?
Well, of course, I understand exactly what you're saying, and much of the time there is no difference.
But I think that they can kind of be put in a separate group part of the time for several reasons, one of which lots of times the cause of this distress that the people go through, it's situational, you know.
Things happen to them, you know.
coped fairly well most of their life, and then suddenly here they are at, let's say, 68, and they lose a spouse.
Okay, trauma.
Then this means that they've got to start living differently.
Instead of being part of a couple, they are living singularly.
How does that grief, though, differ from the grief that a 40-year-old man would feel if his wife died of cancer?
Okay, I think the
Sometimes the major difference is that you have several things happen at once.
You know, okay, that the man loses his wife from cancer is one situation, but then you have another situation to where the man loses a spouse.
He may to some degree be having a difficult time adjusting to retirement, and then health problems come along.
And this is one of the differentiations.
A lot of things frequently happen at the same time.
Nancy?
Well, I agree with what Jim said, except for the basic assumption that – I mean, how's that?
I agree with everything except your basic assumption.
And what I gather is that you're saying that more things happen to people –
Multiple transitions happen to older people.
Well, in my research of people of all ages, I've done a lot of studies of transitions, one of which not so long ago on people who lost their jobs of all ages.
And they were younger, and there were multiple transitions they were going through.
They were rifts.
Reduction in force, you know, lost their job.
Some of them were getting divorced.
One man's father had just moved in with him.
This is a 35-year-old.
His father had just moved in with him because he had cancer and couldn't care for himself.
His wife had just left to find herself.
And now that he was fired or his job was eliminated, he was part of the theater group of the organization.
He no longer could be part of that theater group.
So everything in his life was shattered.
He was devastated.
Now, there was an older person who had been thinking of retirement, and it wasn't as devastating.
So what I think, Jim, is that you need, or what I've done, at least in my work, is develop a structure for looking at people.
And I grant, if somebody's having multiple transitions at the same time, that's going to really be very traumatic.
But I don't see it as age-related.
That's where I think we differ.
Right.
The only thing that pops into my mind is that, for example, the feeling of grief among older people or the summation of the trauma that we're talking about.
might be different simply because an older person might think there just isn't going to be time enough to recover.
Well, that's a very good point.
I think the time perspective is very important.
And that does, Jim, see, now I'm backtracking.
People's time perspective changes and their view of options.
Now, very often, it's your view of how much time you have left to live.
But I hear people at 40 saying, my gosh, if I don't do this, I don't have that much longer.
Well, so that's an individual matter, too.
But I do agree that it's multiple transitions.
It's time perspective.
It's your perception of options.
So there are lots of things out there that make the difference in terms of counseling.
Jim?
Well, you know, something that I have seen repeatedly in my work is that a person will come in with a problem, and then because of the problem, they've
you know, that they have the symptoms of anxiety and depression, or sometimes they drink too much and so forth.
But as I get to know that person, I find that much of the time that they had a difficult childhood.
Let's say, I don't want to say difficult, not necessarily always physical abuse, although sometimes this happens.
And then this kind of gets them off to a bad start.
Okay, then they, lots of times they've made some,
poor choices throughout their lives, but they still kind of keep things together.
And then lo and behold, then they get 65 or whatever age and all these things happen and they just kind of wilt.
I've just seen this scenario happen repeatedly.
Interesting.
On a related but somewhat different topic, do you find that people respond differently to the idea of therapy in terms of age, Jim?
Well, to a great degree, I do all of my work on a very informal basis.
And to some degree, to the people that I see, see, I visit them in their homes 90% of the time.
That's unusual and wonderful.
It is.
It's just absolutely fantastic.
But to some degree, they don't realize that we're doing therapy.
I'm just coming out and talking and I'm listening and encouraging the talk.
And I get to be a friend.
Well, you know, one of the things that I found that does differentiate people, but I'm not sure it's necessarily age, but...
In talking with an older woman recently whose husband had Parkinson's, and she had cancer, and they were in their late 70s, and she was very, very depressed.
And I didn't live in the same city where she lived, but I said, I know that I could get somebody.
I would find somebody who could come to her house.
I just knew I could.
And she wouldn't talk to anybody who had a label counselor, social worker, whatever.
even though I said well it would be more like a friend or companion and I thought you know if there were any message I would like to give people of all ages is that there are opportunities for help and that sometimes people are afraid that they think it shows a weakness to go for help and yet it really shows a strength because by going to somebody you can really get an opportunity to
Step back, look at your resources, and really move on and move ahead.
And you're entitled to relief from your problems.
But something that's troubled me, Jim, is how to change people's orientation.
That's the voice of Nancy Schlossberg, professor at the University of Maryland, author of Overwhelmed and Counseling Adults in Transition.
Our other guest by phone is James Warnick, chief counselor at the Decatur, Illinois Mental Health Center and author of Listening with Different Ears, Counseling People Over 60.
That question of how willing and eager are older Americans to accept therapy in the first place is an interesting one.
In your experience, Jim, are they more or less reluctant than their younger brethren and sister?
Well, to some degree, see, whenever I receive a call from someone or from a family member, and I would say a third of my referrals come from the individual, a third from a family member,
and a third from related service organizations.
But anyway, these folks are in crisis.
I mean, they have reached the point to where their life is not good as they know it, and they need help.
And so the more sophisticated people will call me themselves.
But usually the people that aren't as sophisticated about services and so forth, it'll be family members or other agencies.
But something that, again, I have found this repeatedly.
Okay, I mentioned the people who had the difficult childhood and so forth, and then they encounter these challenges.
Well, these challenges, well, these folks,
need a relatively long-term help, I mean, because they're more fragile.
But there's also another kind of person who is stable and have lived good and lived successfully all of their lives, and then suddenly they are overwhelmed with something.
Let me give you an example.
I had a woman call me.
She was 68.
She was an attorney.
Two years before this, her husband had had a stroke, and this had left him incapacitated, and it affected his personality.
It was really difficult to deal with.
And anyway, she was just really in bad shape.
But basically, she was a strong person.
So I saw her only a couple of times because she just needed to be told that...
She had the capacity to deal with this situation, and she was dealing with this situation.
And we made some other mechanical suggestions about getting help.
But basically, you've got the stable person who you can make lots of progress with in one or two sessions.
That leads me to a question of, this might sound inside psychology, but I know people of all ages are interested in how their parents are dealt with or how they are dealt with.
If a counselor or a therapist is generally non-directive, or I think in psychological terms, if I remember right, it's Rogerian, with younger clients,
How does that generally work with older people, that non-directedness?
Because it seems to me, Jim, like you're suggesting, in many cases, a very directed, very purposeful counseling may be more effective with older clients.
Well, it depends on the individual.
There are some people who kind of want to be told.
But on the whole, what you do is take the approach that you've talked about
Because, see, any person has to, let's say, come to realize what their situation is and what they can do to help.
And so you just kind of prod them and push them in different directions.
Nancy, what's your general approach to that question?
Well, I want to sort of back up and say, in a sense, all the things Jim says sort of fit into this transition model I've developed over the years.
Jim, I'd like to kind of share it with you and get your reaction.
It's a structure for looking at anybody, whether the person's 50, 60, 70, 80.
The person comes with this problem or you reach out to a person and there's an issue that's upsetting.
What we've developed over the years is what I now popularly call the 4S system, where anybody who comes to you to really understand what's going on with them and how to help them, you help them.
They can do it themselves or you can do it with them.
You can assess their 4Ss.
You look at the situation at the time you're with them.
Are there multiple transitions going on?
Is this situation in their control?
Is this of long-term duration?
So there are a lot of properties that define the situation.
Then we can look at the supports the person has at home, in the community, at work, with friends.
What are the supports?
We then can look at the self.
How able is the person to deal with ambiguity?
Is the person an optimist or a pessimist?
What about the person?
And then we can look at the strategies a person uses.
Does somebody use lots of strategies flexibly or just rely on crying or yelling or whatever it is?
Now, once we get the four S's, we can say we could have a number of people who are 65 and have just lost their spouse and retired, but they're not the same because each person's situation is different, the supports are different, the self is different, and the strategies.
By assessing the four S's, we can then see, well, I need to work on my support system.
And the other person says, well, it's myself.
I'm such a pessimist.
And somebody else says, I need to increase my coping repertoire.
So over the years, what I've done is rather than focus on the age and whether one age has more losses than another, is to focus on a structure for looking at anybody of any age, that is during the adult years, and give them or the counselor a way to step back and look at
the resources and deficits a person brings and then develop an intervention based on it.
So whether I would be Rogerian or not would vary, yes, at the beginning, and I love Jim's title, Listening.
As you're listening, you're Rogerian.
As you're assessing, you might be more collaborative.
As you're developing an action plan with the person, again, it's going to depend on the person.
But so much depends on
which direction you're going in and i think a good eclectic counselor and i think jim sounds like one is probably your best bet question if we can expect such situations such such losses as the loss of a spouse the loss of mobility the loss of of residents or at least the downsizing of residents eventually if we can anticipate them why do we still see
so much grief that sometimes, as you call it, Jim, it becomes abnormal grief.
These are anticipated changes for older folks.
What is the coping mechanism that so many of us are lacking that allows us not to combat these feelings?
Okay, I think the difference is that we are all individuals.
A person that is 70 years old, for example, has lived 25,000 days, okay?
Some of the days have been good days and some have been bad days.
So we come to this age of 70 with different capacities to deal with situations.
I mean, there are, I would say, 85% of the population can deal with these situations themselves.
But you've got this
smaller numbers that really need help because they don't have the capacity.
And, of course, where the capacity comes from, I feel, is from how stable was their childhood and what's happened to them over the next 50 years.
I'd like to take a crack at that, too, if I may.
I think you make a wonderful point about anticipated transitions and one that is made in the field of adult development.
If you can anticipate
and do rehearsing for retirement or widowhood, you are going to be somewhat better prepared than if it's a sudden and unrehearsed and unexpected transition.
There's no question about that.
But the real issue is the degree to which what has happened to you or what you brought about has changed your life.
And I have four things that you can really look at.
How much has this changed the roles in your life, your routines,
your assumptions, your relationships.
Some transitions change all four.
You have just retired to southern Florida,
And then... At the 18th hole.
At the 18th hole, your spouse dies.
This is a new community and you know nobody.
Everything's changed.
Roles, relationships, routines, assumptions.
The other person who's staying in their home community, for example, loses a spouse, doesn't lose necessarily everything else then.
So you have to assess the degree to which your roles, relationships, routines and assumptions are being changed.
And the more that is, I mean, you can be 30 and have everything shattered, and you will really be undone for a while.
So once again, I don't think it's age, but I think it's the degree to which it changes your life.
But I really insist that we talk about aging, and I'm not...
an optimist, and I don't think that, I mean, I am an optimist, but I don't think age is the best thing since sliced bread.
But I think there are a lot of positives that happen, too.
And I think we don't want to just sort of talk about aging as if it's all losses.
There are a lot of gains, a lot of freedoms, a lot of good things that happen.
But the grief is going to depend on how it's affected your whole life.
And I think there are a lot of younger people
who are very affected and can't get it together.
I know of a 28-year-old who went into a deep depression about a breakup that lasted much longer than somebody I know who was 70 and just lost his wife.
I'm just not sure, again, that its age.
One of the important transitions, particularly in the popular culture or mythology, though there seems to be some evidence for it, the more important transition is the so-called midlife crisis.
And it occurs to me that how men in particular handle that crisis and how women react to it.
is often a vital stepping stone to how we will transition the rest of our lives.
Jim, in your experience, what is this midlife crisis?
Does it exist?
And how does it affect the way we transition into, as you point out, the last third of life?
Well, to some degree, I think this midlife period is very important and
and affects some people greatly.
Other people, it doesn't affect them that much, you know.
And to some degree, see, men and women handle this differently.
To a degree, men, when they reach their 50s, they kind of mellow a little bit, you know.
Women, when they reach in their 50s, and again, this is a broad generalization, some women become very more,
much more serious about life and serious in the respect that if they have worked in a home, for example, and then they've started into the workplace, they've become very serious about their job.
And so anyway, to some degree, men and women are coming from different perspectives on this.
Now, this is changing as women, for example, have
spent, oh, much of their life in careers.
But some of the people we're seeing today, at least that I see, they come from kind of the old school, so to speak.
Well, you might expect how I would approach it.
I think the midlife crisis is an artifact of the media.
I don't think, and there is evidence, there's a lot of research to show there is no midlife crisis.
There are crises all through life.
And there is no one time, I mean, Costa McRae have done a major study of issues that affect men over their life course, and they found no grouping of men at midlife.
There are crises at midlife.
There's no question about it, but there are crises all through life.
And this mythical midlife crisis, we read about it in the paper, the guy who needs to find himself, the sort of Gauguin or the woman –
Go get him.
He cuts his hair, gets a different car and a different wife.
But it's not to say they're not midlife transitions where you begin to see time differently.
But the crisis element where you better leave your wife and go off with a younger person who really understands you or an older person who really understands you.
I mean, yes, that happens, but it's not.
You can't expect that when you get to midlife, you're going to have your crisis and get it over with.
Now, with Jim, there is some research, I'm not sure, Gutman's work, but there is a lot of research to show that what Jim said is absolutely true, that men and women at midlife,
the traditional male who's been oriented toward work suddenly becomes more nurturing.
You know, what's this all about?
What have I been doing this?
And the traditional woman who's been taking care of the children and making lunches and dinners says, what's all this anyway?
I want to get out there and sort of fly in the world of work.
And I agree with Jim that that's changing.
But I do think that this midlife crisis, as if it is something that's bound to happen,
It's bound to happen to you.
But it doesn't have to be at midlife.
I recently had what I called a belated midlife crisis.
I wrote to my hairdresser.
I wanted to change hairdressers.
And I said, this is a belated midlife crisis.
It was either leaving a husband or changing hairdressers.
And I decided to change hairdressers.
But you see, I only used the midlife crisis as a vehicle.
And I was ashamed of myself because I know there's no midlife crisis.
Yet it's so much part of the popular literature that I even used it as my excuse to leave my hairdressers.
I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington.
This is Prime Time Radio.
On the other hand, I had a fascinating conversation with a woman recently who has been in the computer business, the software business, and she is reaching midlife.
I'd say she's getting close to 50, and she's having the same reaction that you were talking about the men having.
She's been an executive in a computer firm.
She's reaching 50, and she said, what is this all about?
All I'm doing is pursuing dollars.
And I said, well, what do you want to do?
She says, I want to sell my sister's cloth.
My sister makes pattern cloth.
I don't want to sell computers anymore.
I don't want to do the software thing.
But what am I going to do?
She says, my income will be a third of what it was.
And I said, well, what's important to you?
And she said, that's why I just went to Martha's Vineyard to ask that very question.
And she hadn't made up her mind.
I'm wondering, as more women get into executive positions, if they aren't going to feel the same kinds of pressures as men do, questioning their values.
Well, and I think this is, first of all, you should be a counselor.
You're in the wrong field.
Now that we've established that, Jim and I will help you after the show, and you can move into counseling.
But I think what really we're seeing is that people stock take at different times.
And they ask the question,
Is what I'm doing, does that make any sense?
Does it have meaning for me?
And that's a lot of what's attributed to the midlife crisis, but it does happen many times.
It happens at retirement.
It happens all through life when you say, why am I doing?
My son just finished social work training.
He said, why did I do this?
Are there any jobs out there?
He's having a major assessment and stock taking.
So I think that is certainly something we can all expect in our lives if we're thoughtful people is we're going to step back and say,
Is this what my life is about?
Jim Warnick?
Oh, I agree completely.
I have a couple of friends who they have been working full tilt for 30 years and working in the corporations and attaining this and working at keeping this position.
But, hey, here they are now in their 50s and, you know,
They are really wondering what to do.
I mean, they know, number one, that their job could end tomorrow, even though they are very, very successful, because this is the way the corporate world is.
So they're kind of preparing for another lifestyle, so to speak.
As we all recognize this, as it impacts more and more and more families, how in your anticipation as professional counselors is this going to change the counseling task that lies ahead?
As people approach retirement with no feeling that they're ever going to retire, for example, more and more people, even in their 40s, say, oh, I don't even plan to retire.
I'm going to die in harness.
I know it.
How does that change your job as counselors?
Why would that change your job?
In other words, if somebody... I mean, you're not there to help people because they're retiring.
You're there to help people at different points in their lives when they're dealing with situations...
that they need some help with.
And whether they retire or they don't retire is really not relevant.
I think we're going to need lots of counselors to help people as they get older, just because there are a lot of people, and there are a lot more people in their 80s and 70s.
But I don't think the retirement is the issue.
We have run out of time, unfortunately.
We'd like to tell you that both of our guests have outstanding books available for reading.
If you'd like a specific number, you can call us here at Primetime Radio.
But Overwhelmed by Lexington Books is written by our guest Nancy Schlossberg, along with Counseling Adults in Transition, published by Springer Publishing Company, and the publisher of Listening with Different Ears, Counseling People Over 60 by James Warnick is QED Press.
We thank you, Jim Warnick from Decatur, Illinois, for being with us, and Nancy Schlossberg from the University of Maryland.
Thanks for being our guests on Primetime Radio.
Thank you.
Bibliomania.
Our next guest calls it a gentle madness.
Stay tuned.
Thank you.
What do Cleopatra and John La Roquette have in common?
Well, they're both bibliomanes.
They love books.
We find out about their gentle madness in just a moment.
Stay tuned.
Welcome back to Prime Time Radio.
I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington.
You know, in these days of constant drum-beating, incessant conversation about being online and all the alleged features of the electronic age, it's almost possible to forget that there's a significant portion of the population for whom the aroma of a new book or the sensuous feel of a Morocco leather binding on an old one is one of life's greatest pleasures.
To pick up a fine book and to reluctantly turn its pages because you just don't want to reach the end,
is still to me at least one of the easiest and most accessible of pleasures.
Call me old-fashioned.
To many who love books, however, the reading of them becomes secondary.
They look for points, factors, or qualities about individual volumes that mark them as valuable.
They look for titles they don't have in series they may have created for themselves in dust jackets that always have to be pristine.
In some cases, the majority of books in modern first collections have never even been opened.
They are, in the true sense, in mint condition.
How far back does this desire for the physical presence of books and the fanatical pursuit of them go?
Well, let's go back at least as far as an alleged ancestor of mine, St.
Cuthbert.
Now, it seems that...
Well, wait a minute.
Let's let our guest tell the story of St.
Cuthbert and the Gospel of St.
John, as well as many other stories from his book, A Gentle Madness, Bibliophiles, Bibliomains, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
Nicholas Basbanes, welcome to Washington.
Thank you very much, Mike.
Let's go back to my ancestor.
He would be, according to my lights at least, probably a bibliophile, if not a bibliomain, if he's going to be buried with his head on one of his favorite books.
And, of course, he became a saint, Saint Cuthbert.
Which probably takes him out of the realm of my ancestors.
Which may account for the perfect condition of the book when they opened his casket some, is it four or five hundred years later, when they were forced to flee this island off the coast of England.
And there was this remarkable book, this gospel, in its original binding, of course, of calfskin on lime boards.
And it is...
I understand the oldest book of its kind in the world, and it's in the British Library on display right now.
And still in pristine condition, I understand.
Pristine, pristine.
May I just say something?
You're not old-fashioned, by the way.
I would call you gently mad if you have the...
You described the symptoms perfectly in your opening statement.
Well, I think I share that madness, that gentle madness, with thousands of our listeners because, as I say, in this day and age when everything relevant seems to be online, a good book just still feels real good.
And that is one of the marks of this, I really hesitate to call it a disease, but it's an affliction.
If you feel the vibrations passing from the pages and the bindings,
through your fingers and up your arm and into your being, you have it.
You have that.
But you know, I was going through some things.
Now, I've never heard of a pewter mane.
I've never heard of a numismatist mane or any of these.
There's no mania for any of these other collection habits.
How come there's bibliomania?
How long have people been collecting stamps?
How long have there been stamps?
A hundred odd years.
People have been mad about books for as long as there have been books.
I suspect, now there's no documentation, but I would imagine in ancient Mesopotamia 5,000 years ago when the first books appeared on clay tablets, there were people who venerated them.
I mean, language is the miracle of our species.
And, of course, to preserve our thoughts on clay tablets or on papyrus scrolls or in vellum, on parchment, on paper,
There really is something magical, and people have just become quite passionate in their zeal to own these things.
Well, you know, when you think about it, there is something magical about a book you can pick up on Monday, and after everything that happens to you between Monday and Thursday, you read it again on Friday, and the whole meaning of the page has changed, and it's still in the same book.
Where else can you get an experience differently each time that you go to it when you think it's going to be the same, and the words are the same and everything?
And not only that, but it will last, if you take care of it, it will last your lifetime, and you can pass it on.
I'm really surprised that some people will say, well, a book costs $25 or $30 or $35.
Think about it.
You go to a movie, whatever a movie costs, that experience is over in two hours, a book you have forever.
Speaking of that, though, speaking of reading them and using them, how many of the books of the bibliomains and the bibliophiles, the collectors you talked about, how many of the books simply were not read?
They were simply collected as items not to read but to have on the shelf.
Well, it is said, one of the questions is, how do you know, how does a person know that he or she is a book collector?
And one of the cynical answers is, you know you're a collector the day you buy a book, you know you will never read.
It kind of makes sense to a degree.
I have a couple of first editions of Faulkner.
But these are in such wonderful condition.
I don't touch these.
Are you kidding?
I don't touch these books.
I hide them.
I read Faulkner in the Library of America editions.
The same would go for many other authors.
So, yes, you're collecting an artifact, but it's the content, I guess, that means a lot to you.
This may explain why you quoted Dr. Rosenbach of Philadelphia, saying not one great library was accumulated by a great scholar.
Is it because scholars have to read the books, and therefore they don't buy books to collect them?
Scholars are scholars.
Scholars are doing research.
Their intention is to write a history or to do criticism.
The collector isn't necessarily preserving things for the sake of scholarship.
That happens to be one of the very happy consequences of it.
But as John Hill Burton said 130 or so years ago in The Book Hunter, it is the disposition of the class to find value where there seems to be none.
He says they will find value in a heap of rubbish.
They will...
collect things that everybody else thinks is garbage.
100 years later, 200 years later, perhaps other people will find value there.
I mean, Melville wasn't collected at all in his lifetime.
A totally neglected writer until the 1920s.
It's funny, my wife is from Australia and she has always amused me with the term they use for flea markets.
It's trash and treasure.
And that exemplifies exactly what you said.
You never know which it's going to be.
Well,
One of the epigraphs of my book, the fourth one, I quote Zach Jenks, a character in Larry McMurtry's novel Cadillac Jack who says, anything can be anywhere.
And I live by that.
I go to flea markets.
I stop.
My car will stop if I see yard sales.
I look in baskets of junk, and you never know what you're going to find.
I mean, you have the case of the Tamerlane, which a commercial fisherman found in an antiques barn in New Hampshire for $15, right?
It was sold at auction for $198,000 a year and a half later.
You never know, which is part of the fun.
My guest is Nicholas Basbanes.
His book is A Gentle Madness, Bibliophiles, Bibliomains, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
And in your book, you don't create this list, but I started it, and you can probably finish it.
I created the Basbanes Hall of Fame of Bibliomains.
I started with Richard Heber.
Who had eight houses filled with books.
He has to be included in the Hall of Fame of Bibliomanes, right?
Well, he would probably be chairman of the board, I would think.
When Dibdin basically coined, he really didn't coin the phrase Bibliomania, but he gave it prominence with a book titled Bibliomania.
in 1809, and he dedicated it to Richard Heber, who, as you have just described, filled these eight houses with 200,000 books.
He said, every person should have at least three books, one for the shelf, one to read, and one to loan.
Because if you're like me, you don't like to let people borrow your books.
Isn't that strange?
I've got a separate file on my computer for on loan, too, and I keep very careful track of it.
Another one I put on my list is Petrarch.
One wouldn't think of him as a bibliomane.
Oh, why not?
He's famous for other things.
For many other things, but he basically started the humanistic movement.
He actually went out and was the first Renaissance book hunter, and he rescued all these extraordinary manuscripts which had been lying under dirt and dust in the monasteries through what we call the Dark Ages.
But so much is owed to Petrarch, a magnificent book hunter.
Another man who is maybe not a bibliomaine, but I put him there because of what he did, Lessing J. Rosenwald.
Oh, you know, I have a quote very early on in the book which asserts that the bibliophile is the master of his books.
The bibliomaine is their slave.
Now, I would suspect, using that as your definition, that Rosenwald...
was the master of his books, but he was dedicated to them, and he is considered the greatest benefactor in the history of the Library of Congress.
All these wonderful illustrated books, which are just a few blocks from where we sit here, were the gift to the nation of Lessing Rosenwald.
And yet perhaps one of the most interesting stories about Rosenwald is the book he bought that he hated.
That's the mark of a great collector, isn't it?
Because one of the themes that runs throughout my book is how the collector preserves.
And this was a book which was a manuscript actually that
kind of an anti-Semitic thing that he was fearful would fall into the hands of the Nazis.
And so he went, he bid for it at auction, he won, and then he put it under seal for 50 years to protect it, not to destroy it, not to hide it, but so at some point...
It could be dealt with properly by scholars, and that's what happened.
And it turns out that he bought that at an auction where he was being bid against furiously by a woman who later, in fact, turned out to be a German agent.
That's exactly correct.
I put Toby Holtzman on my list.
What's the story of Toby Holtzman?
I spent two days with Toby out in Detroit, and the man is really dedicated.
He lives in a beautiful home.
He's wealthy.
And I noticed going through his house, I said, there are no pictures on the walls.
And I said this, and he said, ah, very good.
He said, there is no room in this house for anything but books.
He said, this is a house of books.
And he was quite an unusual, he is quite an unusual collector.
He collects what we call modern first, which is what most, I suspect, American collectors collect.
He would divide them.
One side of the room is living collectors, pardon me, living authors, and on the other side are those who were deceased.
And the day...
That somebody dies.
If they got shifted, huh?
He moves the book to the other side of the room.
And I said, why is that?
He said, because I am committed to the living and to the future.
And so he has an eye out for books that will be collectible.
Not only that, but I understand he's an almost inveterate autograph, an inscription collector.
He is said to be the model for Updike's Marvin Fetterbush and Becca's Back.
the guy who will show up in your face at airports and ask you to sign books.
He'll send books to you if you're an author in the mail, ask you to inscribe them, specify quite
where he wants them signed.
And I've talked to a number of authors who shall remain nameless, one close by who has said, oh, my God, it's Toby walking up the street and pulling down the shades.
He just walks up with a book and says, sign it here.
That's correct.
But it's quite a collection.
The last one for now, because there are many more, has to be Steven Blumberg, about whom you spend a major portion of your book
Not exactly your usual bibliomane, though.
Stephen was arrested about six months after I not only started this book but had the title, A Gentle Madness.
And this is the individual, for those of your listeners who don't remember, was arrested for stealing something like 24,000 books
valued at about seven million dollars from three hundred and forty five libraries in forty five states two canadian provinces and the district of columbia and what made him interesting to me
is not that he was just a thief, because he is a thief, but that he stole these books because he loved them.
Not for greed, but to collect them.
And he's now in prison still.
I've been corresponding with him.
I went to his trial.
I interviewed him.
And by the way, quickly, his defense on these charges of what amounted to criminal bibliomania was, guess what?
Insanity.
He mounted a not guilty by reason of insanity defense.
It didn't succeed, but...
My guest is Nicholas Basmanes.
We're talking about bibliomania profiled in his book called A Gentle Madness.
In terms of the books themselves, you portray a lot of these folks as fanatical, but there seems to be a particular charm about books at least 50 years or so older.
Were the books themselves better made then?
Better bound?
Well, I think so.
I like myself to collect a lot of 19th century books, American books.
And at the fair just this weekend in Washington, the Antiquarian Book Fair,
I picked up a book published in 1872.
Wonderful.
No foxing, which, as you know, is kind of like an oxidization.
There are stains.
Magnificent condition.
But you look at books that were printed in 1920, 1930, when they started putting a lot of acid in the paper.
They're terrible.
So, yeah, yes, I do believe that older books were not only printed on better paper, but I think the workmanship itself.
was done by hand.
You'll find wonderful bindings.
However, I also think that they're coming back now.
I think the publishers are now, again, many of them printing on acid-free paper.
And do you ever see the day when we'll get back to leather-bound volumes for anything other than a limited edition?
No.
Too expensive?
It's too expensive, and books are produced and
Great mass in the hundreds of, well, if you're lucky, in the hundreds of thousands.
Not all books, certainly.
One of the legendary collectors, I don't know if he's a bibliomane or not, was Thomas Jefferson, and some might have been surprised to hear that Rosenwald is so revered at the Library of Congress.
What about Jefferson?
What was his role as a collector?
Well, as the Librarian of Congress has said, the soul of the Library of Congress was furnished by Thomas Jefferson.
As you know, during the War of 1812, the British...
sacked Washington, burned the Library of Congress, destroyed all the books.
Jefferson, reading this, offered his extraordinary library for sale to the country at what was even then considered nominal prices.
And when all these books came in, of course, prior to this also, the Library of Congress was really strictly that, a library for the congressmen.
Now all of a sudden you are getting these books in Greek, in French, the classics.
And he provided a course for the new library to truly make it an international library on the grand scale, the equal of the British Library and the Bibliothèque Nationale and the Vatican Library.
How many of the original Jefferson books remain in the library, do you know?
There were, I think, about 2,500 or so, don't hold me to that, that came up.
But there was quite a catastrophic fire some years afterwards, and I don't know the precise number, but I think about a third of them remained.
But it was the symbolic gesture as much as anything else because it did put the Library of Congress on a new course, a more expansive course.
I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington.
This is Primetime Radio.
In your book, you talk about a lot of private collections that have gone into institutional hands.
Libraries around the world have possessed these books, particularly a fascinating story about how the University of Texas bought most of the world's fine books.
For the average reader, if he or she would like to see, touch, or even read some of these books, how accessible are they?
Well...
Not very, I guess.
If you're a scholar, you can go to any of these institutions, and if you present a legitimate reason for seeing these books, there are manuscripts.
In the case of Texas, they certainly have a lot of books, but the greatness of the Texas collection is in its acquisition of 20th century manuscripts and letters, and it's just preeminent.
But to answer your question,
And perhaps it's as it should be.
You can't just go and touch these things because they are fragile.
They are going to fall apart unless you have a reason to do so.
You have touched and read a Gutenberg, correct?
Well, I haven't read a Gutenberg, but I certainly did touch one, and it was one of the great moments of my life.
And this is the only privately owned Gutenberg in the world now.
It's owned by a New Jersey collector, William Scheidey.
who's arguably the finest private collector in the world.
I mean, the Gutenberg Bible is just the crown jewel.
But when I interviewed him at his Princeton, New Jersey library, he said he's in his 80s now, and he went to his safe and brought out this big
clamshell box I said let me help you sir he said no you sit down over there and then when he opened this I know instantly what it was because it is in its original binding and I had my tape recorder running and you can hear it if you listen to the tape are you okay I said I am a bit lightheaded sir and
He allowed me the moment to savor, and then I sat with him for about a half an hour as he just went through the book and pointed out the wonderful characteristics of this book.
And I touched basically where metal type bit into paper for the first time, and it was quite a moving experience for me.
On the other hand, Bill Gates of Microsoft recently bought a Codex Hammer, then called the Codex Hammer, later renamed, for $30.7 million.
And it said just last week, I believe, he's going to exhibit the book throughout Italy.
Which is nice.
What makes a book worth $30.7 million?
Well, the fact that this book in particular is, we call it a book, but that's kind of an understatement when you think that it's the 72-page book.
notebook of Leonardo da Vinci and this is a book in his handwriting in his characteristic backwards style with many many of his wonderful drawings and experiments and I attended that auction incidentally and the pre-sale estimate was for 11 million and there was a whole contingent of Italian bankers there hoping to bring this back to Italy as a national treasure
And I think that's one of the reasons why Gates is planning to let it go back.
But they were planning to spend.
They figured the pre-sale was $11 million.
Well, okay.
If we have $25 million, we'll get it.
No.
Wow.
I don't know what $28 million is for Bill Gates, probably a day's pay, but he was able to carry the day.
We don't have too much more time, but I did want to touch on the interesting fact that we've spoken mostly about men collectors.
There have been some very famous women.
One particularly, and my favorite, other than Cleopatra, who it turns out was a collector, is Ruth Baldwin, who collected children's books, but she wouldn't allow children to touch them.
It is true.
Ruth's collection now, Ruth has passed away a couple years ago.
And basically, the University of Florida in Gainesville, where this collection now resides, had to wait until Ruth, even after she retired, she was still the boss.
I mean, she came in.
She kept her desk literally at the door.
And kids couldn't come in and use these.
And she didn't even want students to come in and use the books.
Okay, eccentric perhaps, but now what does the University of Florida have?
100,000 children's books, American and British.
from three centuries, including golden books, more golden books than there probably are anyplace else.
What a resource for a scholar now who wants to write about children's literature and the kinds of things that children grew up learning.
As long as the scholar is over 18.
Well, again, now these belong to everyone, not just Ruth.
Your favorite collector, large or small, the favorite story of all.
Well, you mean in the book?
Yeah, or anybody you've met.
We've got about 30 seconds for your favorite one.
Oh, one we haven't even touched on, Chapter 6, Haven No More Because He Remains a Mystery.
And that is my mystery story in the book.
And I did get a letter from a reader in Minnesota, a member of the Baker Street Irregulars, and he loved it as a mystery story, and he was trying to figure out the clues.
I wrote him back.
Nice try.
You know, I think you may have it, but I don't have it either.
If you have the solution to who Haven O'Moore was, let us know.
And write to Nicholas Basbaines, who's been our delightful guest.
His book is A Gentle Madness, Bibliophiles, Bibliomains, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
Something we all share here on Primetime Radio.
Nick, thanks for being our guest.
Thank you very much, Mike.
We'd like to hear your reactions to all or any of our primetime programs.
We've set up a toll-free number for your calls, 1-800-424-9343.
That's 800-424-9343.
Cassettes of any primetime radio programs can be ordered for $4 each at the same number.
Primetime Radio is a production of AARP.
The show is produced by John Myers and engineered by Brian Hemler.
Our associate producer is Janelle Haskell.
I'm Mike Cuthbert in Washington.
Hope you'll listen again next week.
Smoking is a truly addictive behavior.
It's not just a nasty habit.
Hello, I'm Jim Harriot with the weekend edition of Mature Focus.
Today, keeping the resolve to stop smoking.
I'm a fellow with a heart of gold.
The ways of a gentleman, I've been told, the kind of a guy that wouldn't even harm a flea.
But if me and a certain character met that guy that invented that cigarette, I'd murder that son of a gun in the first degree.
That's Phil Harris poking fun in the smoking habit, but it's a serious subject, especially for Dr. Larry Lothman, a cancer control researcher at Houston's Baylor College of Medicine.
A former smoker himself, he sympathizes with those trying to quit.
He has some tips for you.
Before lighting up any cigarettes, just look at those reasons and make sure that you're clear about where your head is with regard to wanting to quit.
You have to want to quit and not to do it for somebody else.
Exactly so.
He says people get angry and oppositional.
I once taught a stop smoking class at a business that was instituting a smoke-free policy, and this one lady refused to do anything that we suggested in the class.
And I said, well, do you want to stop smoking?
And she said, oh, yes, I want to stop smoking, but I'll be darned if I'm going to do so just because the company is telling me to do so.
Dr. Loughman says it's really important to focus on your personal reasons for wanting to quit.
Mark Twain said that quitting was easy.
He's done it a thousand times.
The issue, as any smoker will tell you, is not quitting.
The issue is staying quit.
It hurts so much to stop, and it's so easy to start again, no matter how long you've been off cigarettes.
My champion in one of my classes once went ten years without smoking.
Ten years?
That's right, and then started smoking again.
Dr. Lothman strongly suggests that you make a list of situations where you enjoy cigarettes and try to avoid them.
Some people do so when they're stressed or angry or sometimes it's after the good meal or it's at a party and there's a little bit of alcohol flowing.
Oh, with a cup of coffee is always a favorite time?
Always very much so, that's right.
There are two faces to the challenge of quitting.
One of them is the physical addiction, the physiological craving for nicotine.
When you get it into your system, it feels good.
When you get low on it in your bloodstream, it starts feeling bad because you're essentially going into withdrawal.
The other is the psychological craving, as with the man who lit up again ten years later.
Months or years down the line, I'm in that situation, and suddenly I want a cigarette, and I don't even know why sometimes.
Well, you know that that's not nicotine talking anymore.
That's the psychological side of the addictive behavior.
If you can quit, the physical craving usually stops after the first few days.
We tell people typically the nicotine is out of your system within three to five days of quitting.
Now, that may be the worst week of your life, but at least starting around day four or so, for most people, the physical unpleasantness starts easing up.
As I mentioned, Dr. Loffman quit smoking almost 25 years ago.
Several of his friends decided to quit, but not wanting to go along with the crowd.
He didn't, not then.
They started smoking again, and when all of them were smoking,
I decided to quit because, there again, I didn't want to do what everybody else wanted to do.
You are a true loner, Doctor.
On a more serious note, he's concerned about the increase in the number of women smoking and the fallout from that.
Since 1987, lung cancer has been the leading cause of death due to cancer for women as opposed to breast cancer.
Breast cancer remains the number one cause of cancer deaths in women, but lung cancer is on the rise.
Dr. Loffman says smoking for men was usually presented as a macho thing.
The ads aimed at women take a much different approach.
When you look at the pictures, the women are always very thin and glamorous and high society and that kind of thing.
and therefore the model, you're cool if you smoke.
And he has disdained for those tobacco company executives who told the Congressional Committee they believed cigarettes were not harmful.
I'm obviously not an unbiased source with regard to the tobacco companies, but it was disingenuous at best, and they were outright fibbing at worst.
Just ahead, alternatives to smoking that help, and the good news about quitting.
¶¶
Dr. Larry Loffman says he still carries a pack of sugar-free gum in case things get tense.
Breath mints and candy help too.
Then for the seriously addicted, there's the nicotine patch.
What it effectively is doing is giving you nicotine while you're breaking the habit of smoking.
And the good news for older, long-time smokers.
The moment you stop smoking, your body starts healing itself.
And within a few years, your risk of those terrible diseases goes back down to almost that of a person who never smoked.
So it's never too late to stop.
It's literally never too late and never too early to stop.
Dr. Loffman says it may take three, four, or five times before you kick the cigarette habit, but don't give up.
That's the weekend edition of Mature Focus, a production of AARP, brought to you in part by Buick, the new symbol for quality in America.
Until next time, I'm Jim Harriet in Washington.